Simon Manning: Hi, I'm Simon,
and I'm an engineer
on the CloudKit team.
Today I'm going to demonstrate
how to use CloudKit
to support sharing data
between users of an app.
I'll start by introducing
our Sharing sample app,
available on GitHub.
Then I'll walk through
how to support creating shares
and inviting other users
to participate in those shares
in an app.
I'll discuss how your app
can share
and accept invitations on behalf
of participating users,
how to fetch shared records,
how your app can provide
a customized sharing experience,
and lastly, the zone-based
sharing model
available in CloudKit.
First up,
the Sharing sample app.
As a reminder,
CloudKit is a framework
that gives your application
access to a database on iCloud.
This is exposed in the API
as a CKContainer
through which you can access
multiple CKDatabases.
Each container
has one public database
where all users can potentially
read and write records.
If the device has a logged-in
iCloud account,
your app also has access
to a private database
which contains
that user's data.
And if your app
supports sharing,
then data which is shared
with the current iCloud user
will be available to your app
in their shared CKDatabase.
To demonstrate
both initiating shares
from the record-owning user
and accepting invitations
to a share as a participant,
I'll be referring
to a sample app
available on
the Apple GitHub account.
Sharing is a minimal example
of a contacts app.
It supports creating
new contact records
in the user's private database,
sharing individual contacts
with other users of the app,
and displaying all contacts
shared with the current user
from others.
The Sharing repository
contains an implementation
using Swift concurrency,
as well as a completion
handler-based implementation,
available on separate branches.
To begin sharing, first create
a new contact record
and save it to the owner's
private database.
The addContact function
is called by Sharing's
Add New Contact UI.
It creates a new CKRecord
with a recordType of Contact
and stores a name
and phone number.
The record is then saved
to the private database.
Sharing a contact record with
other users of the Sharing app
begins by creating a share.
Sharing in CloudKit relies
on a specialized kind of record
called a CKShare.
When your user wants to share
records with others,
create a CKShare on their behalf
and save it
to the private database.
Because this user owns
all the records being shared,
they're also the owner
of the share record itself.
This share record
is the source of truth
for what data is being shared,
who it's being shared with,
and what permissions are
available to share participants.
Share permissions are
how the owner of the share
can control access
to the shared records.
The publicPermission property
represents the permission level
for any user
with a link to the share.
By default, users with
just the URL have no access.
Setting this property
to a more permissive value
allows any user
with the share's URL to join.
Each invited participant
also has a permission level
determined by the share's owner.
Participant objects
describe a specific user's
participation in a share,
including the user's identity
and their invitation
acceptance status.
Permissions are set on each
participant object individually
and each participant is added
to the participants array
on the CKShare.
To begin sharing records
from a user's private database,
first determine the root record
of the share.
The root record
and all its child records
will be included in this share.
Then, create the CKShare record
and save both the root record
and CKShare
to the current user's
private database.
In Sharing, the createShare
function initializes a CKShare
with the contact record
to be shared.
The CKShare and root record
are saved to the owner's
private database,
and the CKShare
is returned back to the UI
to start the invitation process.
Both the CKShare and root record
must be saved together
in the same operation.
Saving only the CKShare
will generate an error,
even if the root record
already exists in CloudKit.
Sharing a root record
also shares its child records.
Now that your app
is creating shares,
I'll cover how you can configure
and send user invitations
to participate in a share.
The sample app uses a view
controller provided by UIKit
named UICloudSharingController.
Implementing this controller
in your app
allows users to easily invite
participants to their CKShare,
set up permissions,
view and manage participation,
or stop sharing
records all together.
Here's how
UICloudSharingController
appears in the Sharing
sample app
when sharing
a new contact record.
Users can choose
how to send share invitations,
and permissions
can be configured
in the Share Options section.
Implement the controller's
delegate protocol
to provide additional
information about the share,
as well as receive notifications
about sharing events and errors.
In addition to the methods
described here,
there are methods to configure
the item title, item type,
and thumbnail image
to display on share invitations.
Now that the owner of the share
has sent invitations to others,
your app needs to process
and accept the share
on behalf of the invited
participants.
Enable the
CKSharingSupported boolean
in your app's Info.plist.
This lets the system know
that your app supports sharing,
and should process
invitation URLs
and call the relevant
delegate functions.
When a share invitation
is opened and accepted,
your app will receive
a CKShare.Metadata object
through delegate method
callbacks.
Your app uses this metadata
to inform CloudKit
that the current user is
accepting and participating
in this share through the accept
function on the container,
or through a
CKAcceptSharesOperation.
With an applicationDelegate
lifecycle,
the system will launch your app
and call the
userDidAcceptCloudKitShareWith:
shareMetadata
delegate method.
Initialize a CKContainer object
using the identifier
provided in
the shareMetadata object.
Then call accept
on the CKContainer,
passing in the
shareMetadata object,
to let CloudKit know the current
user has accepted the share.
Now that your app
is sending invitations
to share private records
and processing and accepting
those invitations,
I'll cover how your app can
fetch and modify shared records
that users are participating in.
Records shared
with the current iCloud user
are available inside
the app container's
sharedCloudDatabase.
The same CloudKit APIs
for fetching, querying,
and manipulating data inside
private and public databases
can be used
with the shared database.
In the sample app,
shared records are fetched
in the fetchSharedContacts
function.
It uses the recordZoneChanges
operation
to progressively fetch
and process changes.
Each time this operation
completes,
it returns a moreComing
boolean property,
representing whether there are
more changes to fetch.
It also returns a changeToken,
which is a pointer to a specific
change in the zone's history.
You can use this changeToken
to only fetch changes
that occur
after that point in time.
For the first fetch,
or to refetch all changes
in a zone's history,
set the changeToken to nil.
Managing active shares
depends on the current user.
For owners of a share,
the share can be stopped
by deleting the CKShare record
from the owner's
private database.
The owner can also delete
the shared root record entirely.
The removeParticipant function
on the CKShare record object
provides a way to remove
individual participants,
which can be found
on the participants property.
And lastly, the
UICloudSharingController UI
makes it possible for owners
to stop sharing
with all participants.
For the participant user
of a share,
participation can be stopped
by deleting the root CKRecord
from the user's shared database,
or using the
UICloudSharingController UI.
Note that deleting
the root CKRecord
from the user's shared database
only stops participation
in the share --
the original root record
would still exist
in the owner's private database.
While the Sharing sample app
uses UICloudSharingController
to handle participant
lookup and invitation,
you can also implement
this functionality
with the CloudKit API and
build a custom user experience
for both owners and participants
of a share.
First, to search for
participants to invite
to a CKShare,
use the CKFetchShare
ParticipantsOperation
or shareParticipants functions
on the relevant CKContainer.
Phone number, email,
and user record IDs
are supported as parameters.
Next, set the specific
permission level
for this participation,
and add the participant
to the CKShare
with the addParticipant
function.
Always save
the modified CKShare
back to the private database.
The saved CKShare record
has a url property
which can be sent
to invited participants
to accept and process.
An invitation URL
can be used to fetch
the share's CKShare.Metadata
and confirm participation
through the
accept(shareMetadata) function
on the app's container.
The Sharing app demonstrates
CloudKit sharing
with a hierarchical
sharing model,
where a single record is shared
as a root record,
and any children of that record
are also shared.
Zone sharing, a new model
introduced in iOS 15,
allows entire zones of records
to be shared instead.
When sharing a zone,
all of the records
in the zone are shared,
not just a single record's
hierarchy.
Because zone sharing affects all
of the records in a record zone,
this type of sharing
cannot coexist
with hierarchical shares
in the same record zone.
You can either have one or more
hierarchical shares in a zone,
or a single zone-wide share.
Zone sharing
and hierarchical sharing
each have their benefits,
and both should be utilized
depending on your use case.
In the context
of the Sharing sample app,
zone sharing could be useful
if groups of contacts
were organized
in separate record zones.
A zone share
could be used to share
those groups of contacts
with other users.
To learn more
about zone sharing,
check out "What's new in
CloudKit" from WWDC21.
To create a new zone-wide share,
initialize it with
the custom record zone's ID
to be shared and save it
to the private database.
The process for accepting
share invitations
and fetching records
from the shared database
is the same as before.
To determine if a share
is a zone-wide share,
check the recordName property
of its recordID.
If the value is
CKRecordNameZoneWideShare,
the share is managing
a shared record zone;
otherwise, it's managing
a shared record hierarchy.
Now that you know how
to support sharing in your app,
start creating CKShare records
and allow users
to collaborate with others.
Get a jump start
on your sharing UI
using UICloudSharingController,
or build a custom implementation
to fit your needs.
Use familiar
fetch and modify API
to access shared records
from the shared cloud database.
And start exploring new
sharing use cases in your app
that could benefit
from implementing zone sharing.
Thanks for watching!